Media standing everywhere
Oh, yeah. So we had to go and tell them off before.
I know, but I told them that they're wasting their time.
Are you all right?
I was going to say, are they leaving?
What did I do?
Have you thrown your toys?
No, I've got another.
You've got another sleeve.
It's got to be there.
Yeah. Okay.
Thanks, Steve.
Okay.
I'm going to go. I just have
to go to
a different committee.
Right. Good morning, Minister. Great to have you here.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
You're welcome. Fire away.
No, you first. So you want to hear some comments from me and then questions?
Yes, please. Any day.
All right. Well, thanks so much. Well, colleagues, thank you very much for the
invite in. Can I recognize, I think all of us were at the field days last week, and
what a celebration of the exceptional nature of New Zealand
agriculture. The interesting thing about the field days, it's not only
about the farmers and their animals or what they grow, but I think it increasingly
becomes a fantastic demonstration of the innovation
that sits behind the New Zealand primary sector.
And so, it was good to see so many farmers and growers out
enjoying themselves and in a better place than they have been
previously.
You all right? Did you just go round there and come back?
Just conflicts because we've got Jones next door and
Ozzy in there. Good.
Welcome back.
All righty. So a couple of things I'll touch on and then, of course, we've got
plenty of time for comments and questions.
First is we released last week the situation out for the primary industries.
There's the forecast for the next year, and the primary sector continues to
deliver for the New Zealand economy.
Expected
exports up 6% to hit $64 billion for the very
first time. Estimated to grow to $70 billion by 2030.
I think it'll actually be higher than that, but it's just positive news and all in
the right direction. The standouts I think were dairy up 5%, a
record of $28.6 billion worth of exports.
Meat and wool up 14%, which is extremely good news
for beef and sheep farmers. A
record $14.1 billion worth of exports.
And hort up 7%, 9.5 billion. Kiwifruit, the standout I
think within that is 16%. The kiwifruit sector is getting great
returns all around the world, almost every market, whilst at
the same time they're increasing their production.
Processed food was up 5%, 3.5 billion, which of course is where there's additional
value being added. The other thing I want
to mention is the state of the sector and the
men and women that work in the primary industry.
When we came to government,
confidence levels in agriculture through public surveys were as
low as -66%. In July of last year, they were
+33%, which is a significant increase.
It's a combination of things, and you've got to remember that we've had
adverse weather events, which is challenging for farmers and growers.
But I think it is on the back of farmers feeling valued,
working hard. We've worked hard to simplify rules, to make it easier
for them to meet their obligations, because they do have to meet obligations.
But at the same time, they're getting better returns in international markets.
From a trade point of view, without good trade access, our farmers and growers
wouldn't be able to produce all that they do.
83% of all of our goods exports come from the primary sector.
More than 15% of GDP is from food and fiber.
Some standouts are now the UK FTA is now three
years in operation. We've seen almost a 79%
increase in exports to the UK during that period of
time, with the primary sector doing a lot of the heavy lifting.
The EU FTA is now two years in force, with an extra $3
billion worth of exports, again, predominantly from the primary sector.
And a few other areas of interest, the UAE FTA, which
on entry to force warrants 99% liberalization, saw a
34% increase in exports in the first six months.
That's been moderated as a result of war in the Middle East, but there's still a
very strong demand. You may well have noticed tariff
rates from the
US, and that has been a confusing and
changing
sort of story. We started at 10% on liberation day,
went up to 15% as a result of us having a very
modest surplus.
That was found to be illegal. It went back to 10%, and the US has just announced
that it's likely to go to 12.5%, which in itself is less than
most exporters thought. They expect it may go back to 15%.
But even with all of that, we've been able to get our beef,
kiwifruit, and a few other things back down to the equivalent of a zero tariff
rate. And our exports to the US have gone up by about 4% by
value over that period of time
We now have greater market access
and demand for what we produce from the primary sector, which is, I
suppose, a good position to be in because our exporters have
options as to where they put their product.
But we face the challenge of how we meet that growing demand for the high
quality and safe food and fiber we produce in New Zealand.
Last week at the field days, we announced a new scheme and
policy called Land Use Flexibility, helping Kiwi farmers and
growers to feed the world. And as we have more market
access, the free trade agreement with India is an example, which has the
potential to be as important to New Zealand's economy and our
primary sector as China is, how can we
increase our production whilst keeping that very high quality for
safe food that are environmentally consciousness.
And so ultimately,
consumers around the world
like the products that come from New Zealand.
They like the story that backs that up, but ultimately they have
choices. So this land use flexibility says to farmers that
actually the government is going to co-invest in projects to
test out how we can improve environmental and climate outcomes
whilst increasing production. And, behind that, we
announced six projects which are co-funded in the private sector, in
dairy, red meat, forestry, in aquaculture,
in horticulture, and around Maori growers.
As an example, in dairy, the project aims to reduce nitrate
leaching by 20% whilst increasing
efficiency and productivity on farm.
On red meat sector, there are pilots will be underway, where the
use of collars
aims to increase after utilization by 20%,
thus creating more red meat with the same
amount of land and so on. I would say that
actually we have an opportunity to feed the world and grow the New Zealand economy.
It cannot be at the detriment of the environment or climate
change. The two have to go together.
We have the ability, as we've seen at the field day, to continue to innovate and
the government with the private sector see this as a
partnership. Finally, in this area around catchment groups, which
again looks at the opportunity around
better management of resources and water.
We've announced $40.5 million over the next four years, an increase of $4.5 million
this year. We support about 51 catchment groups at the moment, well, actually 51,
and we're looking to establish 17 and support 17 collectives to sit over the
top. I think where farmers join together in these catchment groups with
decision makers, you get a much, much better outcome, and we're looking
to encourage that. The budget itself, which is before you,
budget this year allocated $4.77
billion over four years to the Ministry of Primary Industries.
We've found savings of, we announced savings of $13.2
million per year, which we've been able to do.
We've also had an increase of $119 million around aquaculture
settlements, $170 million for wilding
pines, a small $2.2 million to help the
ministry get ready for the India FTA implementation,
and $47 million for other settlements.
Two final bits I'll touch on, and I'm sure we can talk more
in questions. You will be aware that
McCain's has announced the closure of a plant in the Hawke's
Bay, which has created concern. I've been to visit the
region and met with the mayors on a number of occasions to have conversations.
There are a group of vegetable growers there who are exploring whether
a private purchase or cooperative may work in the place of
McCain's exiting. We've committed
$50,000 to help with the early stages of feasibility study to see
whether that business model could be put together.
The growers themselves, with the council and others, are currently working through
that. I would caution that I think it's very, very difficult, but the government
views it, we have a role to play to support those growers
in the meantime to see where they get to.
I'm going to be very cautious in what I would say around that because there are
commercial discussions and negotiations going on at the moment, and I certainly
don't want to get into the middle of those.
But they have made a reasonable case as to
their view that they think there could be a future for a
plant there in the Hawke's Bay, and so we're happy to join with them, to work
through what that could look like.
But I would also caution it's very, very early days.
Finally, on Maori agribusiness, we in the budget have money
allocated to continue to support Maori
enterprises. One of the very big challenges I think we do have is around
underutilized Maori or multiple iwi land.
It's why Mike Buttrick is an associate minister.
I've given him responsibility for Maori agriculture with a
particular focus on working with landowners to try and find ways
to free up land and get better access to that.
Ultimately, about 10% of New Zealand
agricultural land is Maori owned.
It contributes about $12 billion directly in output and employs a lot of
New Zealanders, including a lot of young Maori New Zealanders.
So you'll see a greater focus on land utilization from the government
with Mike's
giving this particular specific responsibility.
We hope to see other things that we can do as we move
forward to help with better utilization of iwi land.
With that in mind, I've got pages more, but why don't I stop for a while?
Fantastic. Right. Well, I know we've got a question from Steve.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And, just a quick note, I appreciate your
finding 50K to support the bid for a growers' cooperative
for McCain.
I think they probably need to find a bit more than that, but it's a step in the
right direction.
As to your expenditure you referred to on-
The deal that was done and announced at Fieldays around the $18 million
contributing to the Dairy New Zealand project around
improving outcomes.
One question I've got for you is that given how well dairy is doing,
aren't they wealthy enough and big enough
to be investing in that stuff themselves?
It's a good project, but why is there $18 million of public money
going towards that
when we're losing arable farmers in Canterbury?
And shouldn't the arable sector be being better supported
through public money?
Well, I'm not going to get into a debate about those you think are wealthy and what
they should be paying. I think overall, the government has funding available and
good projects come forward that will help us meet environmental
obligations or grow the economy, which is good for all New Zealanders.
We've considered them. We don't want to be a government that
necessarily sits there and says, "You're too wealthy, let's take off
you," because that would end up with tax-
No, but you're putting public money.
Yeah.
You're investing-
Let me finish. I didn't interrupt you.
Yeah.
So we can either have question answer or have a debate.
We should do that in Parliament, right? So ultimately, you are right about arable.
So the other reason why I've asked Mike Butcher to take on
responsibility is the allegation for arable farming.
They are finding it more challenging.
There are a range of reasons for that at the moment.
The first is prices around the world are down because of
oversupply,
firstly. Secondly, they face
challenges down in Canterbury, particularly because of a number of weather events.
And then thirdly, ultimately, they have had costs put on them.
Some are to do with input costs from overseas, others are to do with very,
very restrictive rules
in Canterbury around what they can do and how they can do it upon their land.
You'll know that through the RMA and other areas, we're working through to simplify
rules and make them more user-friendly whilst
ensuring environmental protection.
But there is support that goes into arable farming, and it is a priority.
Why have we done that for dairy? Well, the dairy, you're right, is a significant
contributor to the New Zealand economy.
It's a very important part of our export profile.
Although only one part of our export profile, we think that
we can get the environmental gains more quickly,
whilst improving
production by partnering with the sector, Steve,
not telling them we think they are wealthy and therefore they should pay
themselves.
Can I do a follow-up?
Yes, sure.
In terms of the ambition around
reducing nitrate, which is a good ambition.
Mm-hmm.
How do you contend with the fact that we're getting an expansion of
dairy now in Canterbury, looking at 40,000 new cows,
and the primary problem with nitrate leachate is the sheer
volume of nutrient going into catchments.
So
aren't you failing to appropriately
manage that volume of nutrient
when you're allowing further expansion of an already
very extensive,
very intensive form of farming?
So the two are not linked, by the way.
This is a new policy going forward. The other is existing policy.
So land use flexibility is about saying to farmers, rather
than a heavy-handed approach through regulation and councils as to what you can
and can't do with your land. If you can show an improved environmental
outcome, then actually you should have flexibility to look for the better
value from your land. Let me give you an example, which I think
comes from Canterbury, but I'd need to check to be entirely sure.
I went to, visited a group of farms a while ago, a dairy
farm that farmer had the other side of the road,
a beef lot. In winter, he was not allowed to put his
dairy cows there, even though there would be a better environmental outcome because
his soil was better, because it would be viewed as a land use change with the
potential for dairy. So, the rules were getting in the way in a better
environmental outcome. So land use flexibility is about saying, "Actually, we
want better rules. We want an improvement when it comes to the
environment." But the way to do that is technology and
innovation, not closing down farms.
Your point about Canterbury is not an unreasonable one,
but ultimately, that's one of the reasons that we're going through
replacement of
the RMA, because we want better certainty for everybody
involved. And by the way, some of those arable farmers that are finding it very,
very hard to make money on their land are looking for other types of land use,
some of which is likely to be dairy.
Exactly. Yeah. Thank you.
Joy, you had a question.
Thank you, Minister.
I wanted to ask you a question with regard to the baseline
savings
of 13.2 million
per annum over a period of years.
Can you tell us exactly
how you're going to, or the ministry is going to achieve that reduction, and what
specific activities or functions will be cut or lost as a result of that?
Yeah, sure. I'll pass to Ray Smith in a moment, who may be going to go into a bit
more detail. But we're very clear in looking for these savings,
that
I've been very clear and very insistent that actually
there should be no cuts and reduction of service at the front line.
And that's very similar to the process we went through two years ago as
well. And so ultimately, as with many New Zealanders
and many, many farmers who have to look at ways to drive
efficiencies within our organization.
They are doing it every day within their business.
How can we achieve more with the same or a reduced amount
of effort or input? How can we be much more efficient?
But I want to be very clear again, I've asked the department to
ensure that the delivery of frontline services remains the same.
And actually, over the last two years, I think we've seen a significant increase
in effort and activity, both through organizational structure, but
also necessity as weather events and other things have happened in
biosecurity from MPI. But Ray, maybe you want to go in a bit
more detail.
Yeah, sure.
Just first thing says there's no change to frontline.
Service. And if you think about the 13 million, just think about it in the context
of $1.3 billion budget. So, to
quite honestly, these are largely going to be through administrative savings that
we can make through the things we can do in the back office areas or
around the contracts we have in here and with IT systems or
administrative things that we operate.
So,
our staff won't really notice any difference as we go through
this. Whether it's getting a gain on a property
lease or whatever it is that we're trying to do.
At this level, that level of savings
is not going to impact any of the frontline services.
So I'm very confident about that. In fact, we haven't initiated any sort of
reorganizing anything on the basis of that number.
So, sorry, just a minute. So, the second
part to my question was around what specific activities and functions will be
cut. I mean, aside from just-
Office space house
... okay, reduced, sorry, I should say.
So, I see that a large chunk of the reduction is in the
policy advice and ministerial servicing.
So how
will you ensure that OIA responses and WPQ responses
are received on time? And I'd be really interested to know if you'd share what your
rate of on time responses are.
Yeah, they've been very good. It's something I've said to the ministry,
irrespective of the number of parliamentary questions you may
get and our view of how helpful they may be or
OIAs, the rules are clear, the law is the law, so we work
to adhere to those. There are occasions where we miss deadlines, and there'd be a
range of reasons for that. But we have a view
of getting OIAs out as quickly as we can.
And I've got to thank the ministry because we get a very significant number, and
they have a great team that works upon that.
But again, there are many ways where you can draw efficiencies
within many offices, including mine.
We've looked at the processes we have in place, how many people are involved in
that, how we can get decisions more quickly as to information needed and OIAs
going out and so on.
But Ray, I don't know if there's more you want to add to that.
Yeah, it is a big overhead cost
for government agencies because the number of OIAs and parliamentary
questions continues to increase.
Mm-hmm.
And at quite a rapid rate, I have to say.
Mm.
And so we have absorbed a lot there.
I'm not concerned about our ability to do it.
I think we sit around about the 95% mark on OIAs.
But perhaps more important statistic in there or one to look alongside,
if you sort of, as I'm trying to gauge how we're going,
is the complaints that are made to the Ombudsman and how many of those are upheld.
And I think you'll note that we have, I think, only one or two out of the, and
the number of complaints come down.
So even if we sometimes kind of miss that first deadline, we make sure
that we do what complainants or requesters are asking, try to get that
right. On the PG side, I think we're pretty good.
But there are large volumes, and
all of us in the public service are going to have to think about as we go forward.
We can't have an ever-increasing number of these things without some
rethinking about how we deal with responding to them.
Yeah. Can I have that one sec? Yep, thank you.
How many staff positions will be affected?
Well, none-
From the 13.2 million reduction?
None specifically from the 13 point.
We've
currently got 3,467 staff, I think as at the end of May on board.
That's roughly what we had last year.
Our projection was always that that will fall slightly.
So that's now bottom-team forecast
as we find administrative efficiencies.
So we're not targeting any particular areas to take people out of, but we
have been operating
slightly below what we could afford to operate with, with staffing numbers,
and anticipation of the fact that we would have to continue to make savings.
There has been no problem with that in terms of the services we provided.
So I feel that we had planned
forward well on anticipating the fact that we'd have to make these
savings, and so we're in quite a good position.
So you won't see us heading off on a major restructuring to try and achieve the
savings you want.
We might go to it. There's a lot- I've got more subs if I can come back.
Oh, no, we have one more, and then we'll go to some others.
Is it a sub or a new primary? No, it's around jobs
and things. Mm. Is the
ministry's Biosecurity New
Zealand business unit exempt from public service number
job cuts?
No.
It's not.
Well, nothing is exempt other than that which has been stated by the
government, which is there are a range of departments that are in different
categories. I think that was part of the original announcement.
But
the thing to think about when you think about NPI's business
is all of those frontline border security roles are
not funded through taxpayer funds.
Mm-hmm.
They're funded through levies that are collected through passengers or through
cargo.
Okay.
And so, in a sense, they're not part of that
scheme. So when we think about frontline staff
there, and that's about 700 odd frontline staff work in those frontline
border roles. They are funded through a different mechanism.
And we're happy with the funding that was there because we just reduced the fees
from sort of $16 to $12, I think, on the airport
passenger levy.
Likewise, food safety is about 70 or 80% cost recovered.
So again, businesses pay for the services they get, and that's how the staff are
paid for.
So in terms of biosecurity overall,
I'm not concerned about any of those frontline areas.
But biosecurity,
like all of the other business groups in NPI, all have
functions in the head office with me here in Wellington as well.
And that's where collectively we can probably make more gains
So that comes to the point where I said very clear that in looking for these
efficiencies, actually, the frontline service should not be
affected. But there is a difference between what happens at the back office,
and then those who are out on the frontline.
So ultimately, if you go back to a period of time,
I think under the previous government, we saw a very large increase
in the number of people across the civil service, but not
an equal amount by way of percentage on the frontline.
We've been very focused in this direction that says where efficiency be
made, they should be back of office.
Frontline, actually, where we're able to or where there's necessity, as you've seen
from time to time when there's been a pest infiltration or something, the
resources and people are there to deal with that.
Just seeking quick clarification.
Very quick.
So you're saying they're not exempt from the government's public service broad
number cuts?
So I'll answer this. So you're looking for a headline that says, "Ah, they're going
to be cuts."
No, I'm not. I'm simply asking a question, Minister.
So ultimately... That's good. So well, it feels like you are because we've answered
that, but I can be very, very clear.
No, I just wanted to clarify that. That's all.
Well, I'm pretty sure it was answered very, very
clearly. It doesn't need to be exempt because ministers have the
ability to make decisions for themselves.
And as previously, as I'm saying again now, there will be no reduction or
cuts to frontline services over the areas that you're speaking of.
That doesn't mean there won't be changes to the back office.
But ultimately, when I talk to farmers, they're very keen to make sure that the
border is secure, and they probably are happy for us to
reorganize to some degree internally in the back office, as long as
the frontline is not there. But we didn't need to go and seek an
exemption for the frontline because we're given a very, very clear
commitment over the last three years to increase
support in that area, not decrease.
Thank you, Minister. We've got a question from Dana.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister. Look, firstly, can I say congratulations on a fine
piece of work with the Indian FTA and what that will mean for our primary
production exporters
and producers. But what I'm interested in understanding more of is how is
MPI supporting those farmers, exporters, producers,
orchardists, to take advantage of the new trade agreements,
specifically India, but of course others as well.
Well, there's a couple of things there.
The first is,
so for an exporter, put the tariff reductions and quotas and so on aside for
a moment, although we've been very fortunate with our negotiators to get
things others around the world no one else has had before.
One of the more important things we can do is help exporters
from the primary sector get their goods to market a lot more quickly.
So within the free trade agreement, there are commitments on both sides, Australia,
India, and New Zealand, that perishable goods should clear their
border within 24 hours or hours, and non-perishable within
48 hours. And that would be a significant improvement from
some exporters and what they've faced over periods of time.
MPI play a very important role in that, both in ensuring
certification of the product that goes to market is recognized, but they actually
work very, very closely with their counterparts in India and other nations
to make sure the system works well and to build levels of
recognition and trust. We have people in market from
MPI, and in fact, actually, the number of, a couple of places around the
world, extra posts have been established to put more people there.
They are doing the day-to-day business of helping our
exporters
as they have products cross the border.
And they're also actually where challenges may be created, are able to
act specifically to try and work that through the system.
But maybe there's more you'd like to add.
Oh, I mean, I think we're in a pretty positive place in terms of
trade and market access around the world.
And
probably the big,
I think the challenge that's going to emerge for farmers and growers in New Zealand
is trying to fulfill all of those opportunities that exist in those trade
agreements now. And it's very diversified.
And you can see that if you look into the SOPI results.
You can see increasingly people are able to, or companies
in particular, are able to take advantage of a whole range of different markets
now. And so India's going to just give us a kind of an even bigger
diversification.
Just a supplementary on that, thank you.
Are you confident that with the increased trade, that the
certification or quality assurance at the port in terms of-
Oh
... assessing-
Yeah
... shipments or containers going out will be able to keep up?
Oh, 100%.
So again,
the food safety system operates on almost
70 or 80% cost recovery. So if you're running a food business in New Zealand,
whether you're a Fonterra or a small business, it doesn't matter.
You pay for the services
that are required. So all of that certification is paid for by the companies,
and so we just adjust our staffing levels to meet the demand as is
needed. So yeah, I'm not concerned about that.
Thank you.
I've got a quick sup on that. It's an exciting opportunity for
lamb farmers as well, obviously, sheep farmers.
And I just wonder, what's this secure-- is there a secure cold chain?
Is it just for frozen? Do they just take frozen meat at this stage or?
No, they can take either there.
Or are we working on that?
And so into market,
it is very, very clear. It's the same as we do to other countries.
Then in country, that's very much to do with the exporters
and the arrangements that they have with the importers and so on.
But it's evolving very, very quickly.
Yeah.
So you look at fruit as an example, where we have had fruit go in there, although
it's been very challenging because extremely high tariff rates.
With the new FTA in place, there's a lot of talk about investment in
the cold chain there. There are New Zealand companies are looking forward to
going and playing a part in that, giving advice or help with the construction and
things like that. Some have said they want to go and establish in India
themselves, which by the way, would be an investment where New Zealanders and
Indians are employed to help grow the economy.
And so ultimately, it's a very large country.
It's a little bit like some parts of Southeast Asia have been previously.
Yeah.
This will evolve and develop over time as the amount of product that comes from New
Zealand flows and increases.
Fantastic. Thank you.
Right. Maureen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Minister,
to show the congratulations on the work that you've
been doing for New Zealand. I want to bring my question home a little
bit, which is about the agricultural recovery assistance.
Mm.
That's more than halved in this appropriation,
and I just wondered if you've got special intel that tells you that weather
events are going to reduce, or have you got a different way
of
distributing that, and how will you target given the reduced amount?
Yeah. So
funding as it is needed is made available.
We've increased our funding in a number of areas, including in our field
days last week, announced additional funding to get people ready for weather
events. So part of it, we're also doing it as, not only just when
things happen, but how can we make sure farmers and growers are
well prepared, because there are going to be more.
And so, that investment is going into some farm leaders in areas and different
organizations and so on, and so preemptively getting them there.
But generally,
so the fund is available for us to use where we need it.
It comes from a number of places across government, but the
funds we have available to us, I think are an area that we
need.
Yeah. A quick sup?
Yes, sure.
Thank you. So if this particular fund is oversubscribed, what you're
saying is there will be money
for farmers-
Yes
... if needed.
That's right. So very much a case-by-case basis.
So we have the ability within the budget to move money around with
contingencies. A better example probably is around
biosecurity. So rather than having an amount of money,
say this is for what might happen, right, which means you can't use it
elsewhere. We have the ability to
seek additional funding within our own budget or go back to Cabinet where something
of an extreme nature has happened.
Mm.
But the point that I'd make is, yes, we have the relevant funds that we need, and
should we need more, we have the ability to allocate that.
It's very reassuring. Thank you.
Mm-hmm. Thank you, Scott.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister. How much of the 2026/27 funding
allocation for the Primary Sector Growth Fund is expected to support
climate adaptation and resilience compared or
against increasing production and output?
So,
we've made some changes to the fund last year to focus and target
it more. Those who seek funding for the government have to put
more in for themselves, and we think it's the way that we can get a
better use of taxpayer money across many more projects.
It is based upon the projects that are put in, and
they are all treated equally. We have an independent panel that assesses
them and gives advice to the ministry that then provides it to me.
And so ultimately, any proposal that comes from an
organization, a private sector, a business, that meets the
criteria of their amount of funding versus ours, and
the criteria that set has an equal ability
to
receive funding. So we don't allocate a certain amount that says it will be
for this part of the private sector or somewhere else, anything like that.
It is very much on a first come, first served basis as long as they meet the
requirement. However, in other areas, we have funding that is made available that
are not necessarily through the Primary Sector Growth Fund.
You would've seen last week that we made announcements around
a climate example with Ag Zero, that $400 million that we're investing to
help find the solutions for farmers to reduce their
methane emissions and other things without
reducing production. And we're able to announce a $100 million
program of which the government is putting in half, to help
uptake on farm for those sorts of things.
So there's a range of areas that funding are available, things we've asked, but
as far as the Primary Sector Growth Fund is concerned, it is very much based
upon the
projects that are, or applications.
And if I could follow. What assurance can the minister give
us that the Primary Sector Growth Fund will not simply become a
taxpayer-funded mechanism to increase intensification?
I can give you every assurance that you
require. But in as far as intensification is
concerned, you've got to be very careful of that word.
Yeah.
Finding ways to produce more of the same amount of less, some would argue is
intensification. I would view that as joining farmers
to do what they've done very effectively and very efficiently for a
very long period of time. So if you take an example of,
I opened a factory a small while ago in Taupō, where
innovation has come. They're taking fertilizer, mainly nitrogen.
They've found a new way to coat it so it releases more slowly
over months rather than very, very quickly.
There's a greater utilization of that nitrogen.
It's about twice the cost of traditional fertilizer, but you get
a much better utilization of it, the grass or trees going to grow better,
and there is much less leaching.
That in itself would allow an increase of production on
the land. Some may call that
intensification, but actually,
as I was saying earlier, maybe before you were able to come in, the land
use flexibility project that we've launched is about finding ways to
increase what we produce, while having the same or
an improved environmental footprint, and that's using innovations.
So in all cases-
I see
...
the funds that have been used around the Primary Sector Growth Fund to
help get better outcomes for the primary sector, and in some
cases, we would hope it would mean more production
through being greatly more efficient.
Thank you. Just quickly follow up on that.
Very quickly, yes.
So if every project under the Primary Sector Growth Fund is
required to demonstrate measurable
environmental benefit, is it possible for a project to
receive public funding despite increasing environmental pressure?
So
there are a range of things. So as an example, there's
a project with beef and lamb
to work on a medium to long term, find other solutions for the
management of facial eczema on sheep and cattle.
And so what we know as a result of facial eczema,
production is less, animal welfare concerns go up as animal
health goes down. And so we're partnering with them.
It's a significant
body of work over an extended period of time, and if we could only
achieve some of what the project is aiming to do, production goes
up and animal welfare goes up. Now that in itself isn't environmental, but it has
an animal welfare component. There are other parts are purely about finding better
ways to produce. There's an example, of course, of funding we've just put in a
short time ago in dairy farming, which is around
dairy
and beef together.
Taking the bobby calf not needed and creating
some other value for them in the beef herd.
And that in itself will
drive greater efficiency should it be
suitable. You're taking another part of the production chains that has little less
value, or some people would view sometimes as a cost, and actually adding value to
it. So it's a very wide broad range of things that are considered.
Some and many are environmental, but they're not all.
Thank you, Minister. Oh, we have a question from Paulo.
Minister, good morning, and I just wanted to take this
opportunity to thank you and your team for all the fantastic work
that you do,
and that you've brought New Zealand to such a high level of trade and export.
Minister, could you speak to the government's key
priorities in supporting and
sustaining this growth? You're over 80% already.
What are your key priorities?
Yeah. Well, first and foremost, whether it's the trade agreements we do, the
work that we do, through MPI or the Primary Sector Growth
Fund, it's about driving up returns at the farm gate for our
growers and our farmers.
They have a huge contribution to New Zealand and the economy.
They're a very important part of the New Zealand economy.
360,000 men and women are employed
because of the primary sector, and we have opportunity
to grow that. The reputation that New Zealand farmers and growers have around the
world is exceptional. We've got to be very careful we don't talk ourselves down
compared to almost every other country that we've seen or I've been
able to visit. Actually, what we do in New Zealand is exceptional standard.
I think that's the reason you're seeing greater returns for the amount of effort
farmers put in
through
customers and consumers all around the world.
So we want a very strong primary sector.
They want to meet their obligations.
They have them around environment, animal welfare, climate change.
But we have to have rules that are fit for purpose to do that, and if a rule that
comes from Wellington merely adds cost and doesn't achieve what we need to, well,
that's bureaucracy. That's what red tape is.
So there has never been a discussion over the last three
years about not meeting obligations, about not improving environmental
outcomes, about not finding ways to achieve more,
and to produce more. The two have to go hand in hand together.
And the reason for that is that
the reputation that we have helps products be chosen
overseas over those from other like-minded similar countries
we might be compared to. We're focused, over the last three years,
on simplifying these rules, but simplifying means easier
to achieve what is needed rather than just adding
cost. And that work should always continue as
farmers continue to look for ways to improve what they do to be
more effective, to be more efficient, to reduce costs, to be more
careful about what they spend, to produce more whilst caring about the
environment and selling more overseas.
The more we get to sell overseas, the greater the return, the better off every New
Zealander is.
Yeah.
Minister, predictions
for the future for primary industries?
Look, I'm extremely optimistic. I think there has not been for a
long time, a better time to be a farmer or a grower in New Zealand or anywhere in
the world.
And the face of
significant headwinds from tariff rates and change in the
US to input costs that have gone up because of the war in the Middle East to
other types of uncertainty and so on, our farmers have year on year,
doing well, doing extremely well for New Zealand, as others
are. The demand for protein continues to increase.
Part of the reason you are seeing good dairy returns, I am
told, and you'll see newspaper articles around this if you look around the world,
is the advent of the desire for people to be healthier
as they lose weight. And when you get Starbucks in America buying
dairy protein to add to their coffee so it has
higher protein in it, it tells me that our farmers are in a pretty good place.
But it's not only dairy. You've seen
meat prices increase as demand has.
This is not just about commodity anymore.
In China, I might have mentioned when I was here last year before you,
one of the meat companies there has launched a burger that is
ready to eat, ready to heat, ready to cook, and the value is added in
New Zealand. And the return they're getting for that, along with many other
products with the value added here,
with that New Zealand grass-fed standard put on it that the government has
developed by sector and is promoting, is exceptional.
And so there's a lot of interest. The final that I would touch on is it's
very broad for the kiwi fruit that is going great returns
for New Zealand, and it's called kiwi fruit, not Chilean fruit or
Australian fruit or European fruit. It's Chilean fruit.
But I want to make you think about the wool industry.
When we came to government three years ago, sheep farmers were hardly making money
on their lamb, and they were losing money in wool, and there were suggestions that
the wool industry would be over. Actually now, they're making-
Money again. They're getting a greater return than their cost.
That's a number of things. The price has gone up.
There are greater utilizations of wool
being used, and last week we announced $8 million, I think it was, for the
Primary Sector Growth Fund to help the next stage to develop other uses
of the wool itself, from pigments to dyes, to all sorts of
things like this, which is a greater value than the wool itself, to
people seeking out New Zealand wool because it's strong to add to
garments and carpets around the world.
The India free trade agreement goes to a zero tariff rate for wool on day one.
When I was there, the day before the signing, I met in a meeting a man who has
a carpet mill. There's a chance his carpet mill produces more carpet
than the whole of New Zealand does.
He sells in India and
the countries around India. He uses
some New Zealand wool because of the strong nature to blend with theirs.
When I met with him, he said, "With the tariff rate coming to zero, I am only going
to use New Zealand wool because of its quality." And if he is producing carpets and
rugs that are of a premium value,
then whilst it will be a commercial negotiation as to what you pay for the wool
from New Zealand, if he doesn't have the wool, he can't make the carpet to sell.
So I think across the board, farmers are right to be
feeling good. They are right to be smiling at field days, and I thank them for
their hard work. We've all got to just work hard to keep backing them, keep rules
simple, so they can meet their obligations to keep selling the highest quality,
safest product in the world.
Thank you.
I've got a quick sup. So do you think the focus on reducing red tape
and increasing productivity, it's good for farmers and it's
good for
growth, but it also has a flow on effect for New Zealand consumers?
If you're reducing the cost of production, it's good for consumers too.
Yeah.
So certainly where you can get cost out of a system, as you've heard us say around
the economies we're going to make in the primary MPI budget,
finding efficiencies is not a bad thing.
Mm-hmm.
Organizations, companies, businesses that keep doing what they've always
done and adding cost, in the end,
go out of business. And government, if you keep doing that, you have to put
taxes up, where a government that doesn't want to increase taxes, we want to be
very careful with taxpayer resource.
So the answer is yes. It is very hard for a government
to do something about what farmers earn.
We can do free trade agreements and give them better access, but actually,
prices often are set internationally.
We can help them add value and to promote to be
chosen first. That grass-fed standard is a very good example of that.
But ultimately, international markets often will set a price.
Sure.
We have an absolute obligation to focus on the costs that are created and put upon
businesses, and in this case, farmers.
And so we've been looking to find efficiencies and better ways to achieve what we
need to.
But it's not just about the cost to consumers and whether that's being
passed on or not. You get better environment and climate outcomes
when you work with people and you find solutions.
I want to use the example, just because it is one that was raised with
me in a meeting in my electorate yesterday, of the Ute Tax.
There is a desire, many more people are purchasing electric
vehicles at the moment. But taxes change behavior, and if you want
somebody to alter their behavior with a tax, they have to have an alternative to be
able to do it. In the case of Ute Tax, where there wasn't an electric
vehicle that could replace it, it just became a tax that either is
a cost to the business or it gets passed on.
There are better ways to find efficiencies when it comes to the utilization of
fuel and other things and so on. Some of the projects that farmers are doing
themselves of how can I use my tractor less to do the same amount
of work to reduce a cost? And that's just something the government should always
focus on and continue to work with, so.
Thank you. I've got a question from Jo.
Thank you.
I just want to come back to the
savings that the ministry is looking to find.
And I note that
some may be found by ending or scaling back
low-value programs.
I just want to know, what
criteria or evidence are you going to be looking at or using to determine what has
been a low-value program that you will no longer continue to?
Well, I'll let Ray answer that in detail, but my expectation is
projects that are taking too long and are not achieving what they need to, or the
money can be better utilized elsewhere
within the system to drive a better outcome more quickly,
is an example of that. So if I come back to the Primary Sector Growth Fund,
it's had a number of iterations. It started a long time ago when we
were last in government. The name was changed with a change of government
under Labor, and I've had a look at it.
And so what we've been able to do there is say all the projects are worthy,
but actually, some of them, the government feels like the taxpayer has a
greater share than they might. And I'm a firm believer
in the case of these projects is those that are asking us to support them should
have more skin in the game rather than merely socializing risk.
There is sometimes a need for governments to do things that others would argue
might not, to try and get that next idea that's going to help the sector to
solve the facial eczema problem, as an example.
But what we did within that was, rather than reducing the amount we
spent or canning it,
refocused it for the outcome, so that to the short to medium term,
there is more likely to be a greater return at the farm
gate for the farmer. But also then saying, but other projects that take longer
that actually could have a greater positive effect upon agriculture as a
whole,
then they could too be supported. But maybe there's some
specific detail.
Yeah, no. I think-
We spent a lot of money. It's a large budget.
We buy a lot of services, and we buy a lot of services from a lot of people,
and we will continue to seek to make changes to who
we buy from so we get the best value.
And we've made some adjustments over time, where I think we've brought new
service providers on that have given us better value for money than others.
You'd expect us to do that. And so there's always gains that you can make
in terms of the value you're getting for your money.
And when I think in an overall sense,
there's those services that are very
directly delivering something every day to frontline consumers,
and then there's a whole range of more discretionary elements that all of us have
in large departments. And so you look into those
and you go,
"Which ones are giving us the greatest gains?" But we wouldn't
make any sort of substantive adjustment to a program we were delivering
without first a discussion with the government or with
ministers. So I think in this whole savings program as we go forward,
the process is probably quite important to understand.
My job is to go back to ministers in the next month or two
with some of the ideas we've got about how we could make more efficiencies.
Those things will be considered by ministers, and then ultimately, probably at
Cabinet for some of those things across the whole public service.
And then, ultimately, that'll lay out a bit of a plan for some of the initiatives
that we'll take on savings. So there's quite a ways to go yet before we
take any direct initiatives. The savings that are already in
train that have come from previous budgets and so on, those are already well
planned for.
Mm.
And as I said, they largely have been able to be taken out through administrative
cost.
And so are you yet to make decisions about which programs may end as a result
of-
Could be-
Finding savings
... could be programs. It tends to be
initiatives rather than big programs that are currently running.
It's not often you see those. But it tends to be initiatives that the department
might be undertaking of working on, or things where the government might consider
actually
that money could be spent on a different priority.
So we'll work together where we think our
budget lines are and what we think we would like to take on in the year where we've
got some discretion.
And that'll be a conversation we have with ministers over the coming months.
There's another part of this, which is around how do you get more for the money
that you have. The $1.33 billion we'll spend
this year, $13.2 million is important.
But perhaps if we can find savings and accommodations,
we continue to do this. So if we take our biosecurity as an example, you've seen us
announce $70 million additional to go into wilding pines because
the case has been made that actually there is a growing problem there.
But before we got to the point of deciding on a quantum of
additional resource for wilding pines, I asked the ministry to go
through what we were doing at the moment and how more effectively and
efficiently we could use that money to get rid of more wilding pines.
Mm.
Because more money in a problem, if the system is not efficient,
creates greater inefficiency, and it takes resource away from somewhere else that
you might use it. If you think about wallabies, whereas in
Canterbury and around Maiot, Ruatāhuna, there is a large
growing population. We've asked the question of how much are we spending, how
many animals are we getting, how can we do that better?
Don't do a big expensive study to tell me that.
Go and find a way to do it better. So there's two things we continue to do.
How can we find savings? Are there projects that actually,
as they come to an end, we don't need to renew them because they have
or haven't achieved what we need? Is there spending that actually could be
reprioritized to achieve much more, or there are savings
equally that we can find through greater efficiency?
So, projects start and finish all the time.
If we take Jobs for Nature, which was under the last government, it was two
and bound. It was four years. They were always estimated to finish at the end of
that. And so that's just the nature of governments making decisions as to where you
spend resource. If you don't make decisions like that, budgets go up, and
therefore taxes have to go up, and I don't think anybody wants that.
One area, too, maybe just to add
useful insight, and it's quite well covered in the papers
is,
if you look at contractor and consultant spend.
Mm.
We will probably finish up at about 7 million this year.
It was 10 million last year. If you look back through the years, it sort of peaked
up in the 40s. So, we've really worked hard
to reduce our
cost in that area to only hit by what we really, really need.
So, I think that's one obvious example.
We did quite a bit around travel at different times, and that sort of
eased off a bit. Sometimes goes up a bit as well, particularly on
the trade related stuff. But on the domestic travel, we've sought to make gains.
So I think there are lots of places we seek to make gains,
that mean that we don't stop doing all the things that people want us
to do, and we don't turn off anything really important,
because it is growing, because there are a lot of us,
and a budget that's still quite large.
Thank you. Great. Okay, thank you. We have a question from Scott Lewis.
Thank you. And just coming back to the Primary Sector Growth Fund, can the minister
confirm that projects that are expected to increase greenhouse gas
emissions, freshwater pollution, nutrient losses,
irrigation demand, or stocking rates are eligible for
funding from the Primary Sector Growth Fund?
Sorry, I don't understand your question. Explain that further for me.
Sorry.
It looks like you're just reading it. Tell me what it means.
Yeah, so effectively, from what I've heard earlier, you're confirming
that there's
not really the environmental concerns for
the whole primary sector growth. But
we're open to everything. So what I'm asking you to confirm is that
those things that could be funded may well include
freshwater issues, may well
include-
Greater climate pollution. I'm just seeking some clarification.
Well, I think when we finish here this week and we all get in our cars and
go to the airport, we may well contribute to climate
change. So we can't divorce our-
So it is climate pollution
... it's not a yes, we can't divorce ourselves from all these things
completely. But the land use flexibility
project we've announced i- is very clearly around ways to
increase production whilst meeting and improving our environment and climate
obligations. And so, no, I'm not going to answer the question the way that
you've put it, but what I would say is actually the Primary
Sector Growth Fund is very, very clear, and it is helping us to
improve agricultural production in New Zealand, whilst at the same time
within that and across government, we look to reduce,
to meet our obligations. So we can't
compartmentalize one part of our
activity,
when from Ag Zero to many other areas of government we have
funding that achieves many of the things that you are asking about.
Christine.
I think we've got a sup from Jenna.
Can I have a sup on that? Because, Minister, because there's...
How will the work that's being done then in terms of Hill Country
erosion projects, the catchment committees, the QEII
investment,
help with the future
climate adaptation work that New Zealand-
Yeah. Well, look, I think that's a very good point.
So if you compare the Primary Sector Growth Fund as part of what we do, you
would've seen just at the beginning of the field days with the Prime Minister, we
announced the doubling of the baseline funding for the QE II Trust to go
out and
work with farmers to protect areas of bush land and native
forest and so on, with riparian planting and so on.
And so there are a number of areas where we have a response.
Equally, in doing that, some people would argue you've doubled the
amount of QE funding, that's not helping to grow
productivity. The point that I'm making is we're able to do many things at the same
time, with different amounts of funding.
Ray, somebody will help me with the amount we put into hill erosion and so on,
because it is a very, very big challenge in parts of New Zealand.
The government has a role to play for that.
If you think about Tairawhiti all the way down through-
Yeah
... all the way down through, um-
27.8
Yeah, 27.8 million.
6.3 a year.
Yeah.
6.3.
6.3 a year, so over that period of time-
Yep
... over the four years. And we
see that we have a role to play in that because you get better environmental
outcomes. And so,
you'll always be able to find one budget
line that doesn't achieve all the things that everyone in Parliament
would want. But across the $1.33
billion, including the significant amount of resource that
the taxpayer puts into Ag Zero around climate change,
we are partnering with the sector and others to come up with the solutions they
need as we would like them to, in an environmental way, produce
more so we can sell more overseas.
Bit of sup.
Sup. Yes. So how can we be sure, how can the
ministry assure us that the Primary Sector Growth Fund is going
to be consistent with New Zealand's emissions reduction
budgets?
Very hefty.
I think
we'll start with the minister wise.
Right.
The Primary Sector Growth Fund's not trying to solve all the problems.
So Ag Zero or the investments we've got on climate change
mitigation, which are sort of close to about $100 million a year in the
budget, whether it's our investments with the Ag Emissions Center or with Ag Zero
or others that we're undertaking,
is a vast investment combined with industry that is going
after methane mitigations. So there are currently an investment in around 13
mitigations that will run to 17. Some of those will come on stream this year in New
Zealand, and will have significant knockdown of methane effects.
So if the bolus for one-year-old animals,
comes to market in the latter part of this year, which is what we're expecting,
that is a potential 70% knockdown in methane.
So,
if you take then there
are two probiotics, I visited the companies that are producing these in the United
States.
Yes.
They look to have a very positive effect on
methane mitigation, maybe in the 40% mark.
There are two vaccines that have been developed, one in New Zealand, one in the
United States, that will knock down methane.
So we've got significant investments in those.
There's also investments we've got in genetics.
So,
sheep genetics are already available, but there are a range of genetics in the
dairy herd and beef herd as well that are under development.
And then there is pastures, and what you heard, pastures.
So on the issue of solving methane, we will
more than solve the current problem on methane. I'm very confident about that.
We're the only country in the world that has invested,
collectively in the way that we have, the envy of most that I visit, for
the fact we've actually managed to get private and public funds together to go
after a solution for this. Because that is protecting the thing that we
are best in the world at, which is primary sector production, and it's
where we trade, and it's where we make our money as a country, so we need to look
after that.
On the Primary Sector Growth Fund, the initiatives that we announced last week,
were particularly important because, the investment, while
we're trying to see growth in production,
those investments are very much about finding the markers of environmental
quality in that investment. So the companies, just as we are,
want to make sure that, as we look to grow, that we can
actually test out in commercial farming systems all of the available
mitigations. One of the things you see in farming systems is you may have on your
farm some mitigation, and I might have some, but neither of us have
stacked it all together or even tried for more.
And so what we're not seeing in all of the markets is kind of what is truly
possible if you get all of the mitigations lined up.
And so it's really an attempt to speed up the
application of the available science, while we look for new science about
reducing nutrient loss, as well as kind of improving on the methane side.
So I'm confident that both those programs are sitting pretty well together.
And on the methane side, I'm very confident that we'll have a solution not just in
New Zealand- But, but I reckon we'll have a solution for the rest of the world
that's got extensive farming systems.
Okay. That's it. Thank you. Can I ask a supplement?
Yes, Maureen, go. Just a quick one on that- It was a
slightly different- ... just to follow up from what you've said. Yeah, sure.
So in terms of
the R&D that's going on into mitigation,
how will you assess then, once it's rolled out, what the uptake
is and what the impact is?
Oh, totally. So,
there are two things.
In terms of the impact,
you have to get into the national inventory.
So, if you develop a product and we license it, and we say, "Yes, it's safe to use,
it's safe for animals, safe for any human consumption.
There's no residues of the product," and so on.
Mm.
That's the first test. Then when the farmers use it, the
second test that we have is it gets into our national inventory.
So EcoPond is an example of a New Zealand-developed product which
knocks down methane in settling ponds by around
97%. That takes out about 6% of dairy farm emissions of
methane.
That's fully tested, the science is proven, and it's in our national
inventory, which means it's recognized worldwide.
So any dairy farmer that puts an EcoPond in it gets a 6% gain on their
emissions profile, and New Zealand gets that gain.
So, that's how we measure it.
And of course, the minister and prime minister announced the early
adoption fund last week at Fieldays, because we recognize
that farmers need to get comfortable with using new technologies.
And we want to speed up the rate of application of those technologies, so we'll be
following that closely. That fund matches private...
So if you come forward as a private sector business company or large farming
producer, with funding, then the government can match it
up to $17 million per year for the next three years.
So that's just to speed up the application rate.
Thank you. Sorry, just a bit of clarification. Yes.
So, in terms of the uptake, so you're relying on farmers-
Well, that's what they're-
... enrolling-
Yeah
... in, into the database then?
Well,
ultimately these things will be able to be measured through a
number of places where they're captured, particularly from processing companies,
and in the returns that they have to make as well about emissions and their
emissions profile. But I
think the big challenge we have going forward is not will we have things that can
mitigate methane, it's actually getting these things at a price
that meet the farmers' needs, making sure the processing companies are supporting
those in a way that allows for them to be pulled through on-farm.
Do you want to add something, Julian?
And the idea is that you have a range of tools.
The government is investing to make sure when they're available to New Zealand,
because our production system is fairly unique.
There are other countries of the world where the animals are inside or in barns all
the time.
Yes.
So it's easier for the
solutions to be delivered.
But equally,
we want them, when they're developed, to be available to New Zealand.
Whilst sitting in New Zealand, we're very large compared to the rest of the world,
and we shouldn't take for granted that the innovation to reduce
methane will easily be available in New Zealand.
And secondly, that it will be at a cost that
farmers could have access to it without it being prohibitive.
And so the reason for investments across a couple of government's ag zero is to
achieve that. It's our way of making sure those solutions are there,
rather than sitting back and saying, "Well, we have to be net zero by 2050," and
ensure the solutions are there actively with the sector investing because, of
course, half of the funding is matched by
the private sector as well, from the dairy
companies to the meat companies, to the banks, to
the fertilizer companies. They are spending their own money, as we are,
to make sure those solutions are here.
Julie.
Just to practically explain it, so we work quite closely
with the companies that are developing the technologies.
So for example, there's a couple of coated urea projects.
The fertilizer companies give us the information on terms
of farmer uptake of those products, so we don't need the
information from pharma. EcoPond
is a similar sort of thing. We work for the company, so we'll get the raw
data from the companies, and it'll depend on the technology.
We've got a project with Beef and Lamb New Zealand on a
platform called Improve, which tracks sheep genetics.
And as those sheep genetics, we see those low methane sheep being sold,
we'll be able to track the rollout of those low
methane genetics through the herd, and then pick that
up in our national inventory. So we'll look,
depending on the technology, we'll look for efficient ways of
collecting the information around how widely it's being used in our
farming systems.
Because we don't want to miss anyone.
No, absolutely. We definitely don't want to
miss it.
So in many ways, it's a proof of concept.
Those were the six projects that were announced last week in partnership with the
prime sector. Proofs of concept and then that gets rolled out.
Yeah.
But ultimately, when it comes to
emissions reduction, farmers will have the tools and be able to make choices for
themselves with their processor as to what best suits their
situation and their condition to achieve what they need to.
And the reduction is set in law, but the processors are already
doing this in many cases with farmers because they say they need them
for their customers overseas. And so rather than a tax, it
actually comes by way of incentive that the
processors themselves have started to incentivize because they want the change
on farm that they then need when they export.
Thank you, minister. We've had another question from Jo Lux. Yeah, thank you.
You know how there used to be biscuits?
Yeah, what's in
Can we have a
new rule that says the minister has to bring biscuits from now on?
Yes.
Lollies. You can have a lolly.
Is there lollies?
Oh.
It's been-
Toss it
Who brings the lollies?
So is the lollies.
Yeah.
It's tough times, eh?
Pick 'n Mix.
The accounts of the primary production sector-
When I first came here, which wasn't that long ago-
No look what
... the speaker...
No, no, it's because these guys would call that lolly intensification.
When I first came here, it was coffee and tea and water-
I know
... biscuits and sandwiches.
It's times of prudent-
Yeah
... prudent fiscal management.
No, it's just they've found more, they've found ways to be more efficient to the
back office.
Okay. Right. We have a question from Jo.
So my question is, related to, it's a sup on the,
mitigation, program, things like that.
So the, the Greenhouse Gas Mitigations Research Program.
I note,
that there is an underspent budget of
$20.337 million.
That's gonna be utilized in the '26, '27 budget.
Yeah.
How come it's, there's that underspend?
And if because of that underspend, what is it you might think about
utilizing it for in the upcoming-
So ranking it in detail, but generally you set up a budget over a period of time,
four years.
Oh, okay.
You don't... You will always try to model when the expenditure is there for a
range of reasons. It, it won't be, and so you don't lose it, you just
carry it forward.
Mm.
You know, ultimately, and so that's probably what's happened here.
Um,
and, and otherwise, you know, as an example, if you put it all in one year, you
wouldn't be able to use it, you would just continue to carry it over.
So it's not a loss of funding. It's just a matter of when, the
funding gets to be used for a range of reasons.
No, but,
that's pretty much it. It can be quite hard to follow actually, um, because
what, what happens is,
and the, the climate funding is mainly in multi-year appropriations.
So what, what happens is what's not committed
as we get to the budget date,
um, then drops out of the budget, but we actually don't lose it.
Yeah.
It gets picked up in an October or peer back, so it'll roll through.
So that, that 20 odd million, um, will be a timing issue about when people
thought they could spend money on projects but didn't get there that, that time, so
it rolls through. Just actually, it's actually more like a normal business where
you just don't try to spend everything you've got in a year.
You've got it-
Yeah
... you've got it then.
Mm.
So it'll, it'll, it'll be just a bit-- But, you know, perhaps a good example of a
reprioritization of funding was the announcement, uh, last
week of the, the $51 million, uh, supporting adoption
on farm.
Um, we didn't need as much as we thought we needed in the, in the bench capital
space on new mitigations. So, but we did, then do need to lift our
adoption rates, and so that managed and reprioritized.
So that's a good example where money carry forward over a period of time.
Main, the important thing from our perspective is we didn't lose the money
and we got a chance to do something with it.
So, so fi- finally on that... Go ahead.
Finally on that, if you think about that, that adoption part, so some years ago, we
could have said, "Well, you know, we should put some money aside to help with
adoption because it's in everybody's interest to find ways for farmers to start
using the new technologies."
By the way, uh, their use of the technology is commercial.
They've paid to get it. Uh, um, companies, uh,
themselves promote them. They spend budget to do that.
So Ag Zero, uh, is a business that we are 50% owner in,
and therefore there will be a return to the taxpayer over time.
So it's, you know, rather than a government money, you should view it just as sort
of, uh, I suppose, marketing and promotion for uptake.
But putting that aside, a few years ago, we'd said we need $51
million for uptake. Uh, ultimately, uh, that money
would sit there, you couldn't use it for something else.
Mm.
A few years ago, the expectation of when, um, these technologies
would be commercially available was further away than it is today.
So we've been able to reprioritize within that and use less now,
uh, uh, um, because we have technologies that farmers are gonna
start using the next couple of years.
Thank you. And we've got a sup from Jo, and then Steve.
Yeah. Thank you. So if I just, I just wanna, um, on that note, come
to the, um, greenhouse gas Maori designed and led programs.
Say that again, sorry.
The, the same program, the greenhouse gas emissions program that Maori designed
and led programs. And I know in a previous budget,
uh, your previous budget, you, there was, uh, four,
$4.279 million put aside for the '25, '26 year.
But
in the
document on page 22, it says that $2.964 million,
um, estimated actual. Is that because it's been undersubscribed, or is
there another reason why there's this-
I haven't-
Undersubscribed. I'll check for you.
Yeah, I think, I think that's the level of commitment by the time we got to the
budget, that cutoff. Um, but, um, the program isn't giving a
reduction. No.
No, no. It's-
So, so
actually I've got it here. So actually, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, 10.
Yeah.
Of the 12 projects, uh, 10, uh, contract are under negotiation, so it's a
timing issue.
Okay. Thank you.
It's actually quite a good point, Rosa, because when you look through the accounts,
you'll see this quite a bit, and it's, can be quite hard to follow.
Um, for us as well, it's the, it's the government accounting system-
Mm
... uh, that was introduced in the late '80s.
Um, so, so you end up, you end up, you end up trying to follow the
track of funding. So it can look like a decrease, but it's actually simply
uncommitted money that-
Yeah.
Disappears and comes back.
Yeah. That's why I thought I'd ask just to-
Yeah. So if it, if it's, if it's a multi-year appropriation, you can feel confident
that the money is gonna roll through.
Mm.
Um, if it's not a multi-year appropriation, that's, that's a different story.
Thank you. Steve, did you have a sup?
Uh, yeah, around the, um, expenditure on greenhouse gas mitigation stuff.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
So Minister, we've invested a lot in Ag
Zero,
and
how, how much
emissions reductions have been achieved through that investment
over the course of years?
It's very similar to the question you asked me last year. The answer is the same.
Ultimately, it's about finding solutions.
So think of it this way, it's equivalent of asking a
pharmaceutical company, for the last three or four years you've been investing in
finding a solution to inoculate against a problem
society has.
Mm.
As you are finding that solution, how many
of those diseases have you fixed? The answer is the investment is to
find solutions are about to start coming to market.
One of them is already available. We think of the others, we're told in the next
couple of years, and as there is uptake of that, then actually
farmers will, you'll see reduction in methane as a result of the
investment and research.
So put another way then-
Great
... at the
catchment group meeting we had the other day, excellent meeting,
farmer-led catchment groups.
I've got farmers telling me that they can reduce emissions by around
30%
through different practices, through different land use.
And so
they have tangible, committed
pathways to doing that.
So where is the evidence that this investment that's going in
here
is the best use of public money if the objective is
to reduce emissions?
So,
we've never said there is a one-size-fit-for remit.
And the farmers you're talking about, all farmers have the ability to do that.
Farmers make changes every day. Often they'll make changes to their farming
practices as a result of engagement with the processor as to what they want and
they require, both on our farm plans, as well as
around
emissions and so on. But there was robust consideration
of this previously when the scheme was set up and Cabinet made a
decision. We've continued in that direction
because we do believe that the solutions that are being developed,
that the government is co-investing in on a commercial basis, will
provide the tools that farmers may want to use.
And the idea is a number of tools, as opposed to saying to a particular
farmer, the way to achieve this change is to do
only this one thing of land use. So the farmers who say that, think they can make
changes in their farm around grazing practices and other things and so on,
are encouraged to do that as others will seek the technology that's
been developed to meet their obligation.
But where's your evidence that that technology is going to deliver on those
outcomes?
Well, it's science-based,
so to be fair-
Can you show us where the evidence is?
No, but to be fair, if we're talking about evidence-
Yeah
... there's no evidence of people saying, "I can reduce it by 30%."
No.
Right?
Oh, no, no.
So that would be pretty hard to... They should knock themselves out.
That's great, but it would be pretty hard to do, unless they had a farm that had
massive amount of inputs in it.
Yeah.
So I would say that what I want you to feel confident in
is these products that we are investing in that
reduce methane have to be scientifically proven,
right? And so they have to be scientifically proven to reduce methane,
and that there are no harmful effects.
And my people in the food safety system will not register these
products in New Zealand unless they can prove those things.
And if you take Ekopod as an example, and Ray was speaking about-
Statement of change
... the reduction of methane of
6% from a dairy farm of a use of that.
It's been developed in University of New Zealand.
It's been scientifically proven and verified, and it's been
rolled out. And on the farms that it's on, the processors are
using that reduction in their ability to
demonstrate to customers overseas, as they're moving towards meeting the
requirements that are placed upon them.
That when you say, scientifically based,
if a farmer is able to say, "Through the following changes on my farm,
I believe I can reduce by 30%," for them to be able to use
that, either with the government or the processor, they would have to be able
to prove it as well. And it always comes back to science, surely.
And you can support that science-
No, you need to go through the chair, please.
Yeah.
It's Joe's next.
Sure.
It's a sup on this
topic, and we've seen some really incredible breakthroughs in this
space in that, we've seen some of those in the bolus and things like that.
So while they're still at the state where they're looking at the
benefits or pros or cons or whatever it might be, how
close are we to actually commercialization
of these
tools so that it's accessible to our farmers to be able to
use them?
Well, the
bolus, which has been trialed in New Zealand farms in Tuakau, South
Auckland,
that company has already developed a processing
factory at Hamilton to produce it. That's how confident they are.
They have a laboratory in Parnell in Auckland, as well as the demonstration
farms in New Zealand. And
they have sought registration. They've completed almost all of the science, I think
that's needed, and we just have to make...
It's up to us ultimately to agree that this product can be released onto the
market with our certification. So that's now in
that part of the process. So
we think there's every chance that product will come on before the end of this
calendar year. So that's very close.
If not then, it's very close. And then you've got
the two vaccines that have been developed.
One out of the United States is probably a little bit ahead of the New
Zealand-based vaccine now. And it's probably
2028 is likely. But they are wanting to bring
trials to New Zealand, as are the two companies that are developing
probiotics.
And the probiotic's quite a good product because it's really taking a product out
of the animal and putting it back in the animal, so it's quite a natural
based product.
And they are also wanting to bring their trials to New Zealand.
So the thing that makes me feel confident- As the companies often
are offshore,
are bringing their trials here to New Zealand, so we can see them
and trial them in New Zealand conditions. And I think if you look between...
So you'll see probably
you've got EcoPon and sheep genetics.
You'll see the bolus probably come on towards the end of this year.
And then in the next year, you'll probably see the emergence of one of those other
type products, which will be a pasture-based product, more
genetics, which may come for dairy animals out of the work that LOC's doing.
Or it'll be one of the probiotics,
and/or the vaccines. So you're looking 27,
28. By the time you get to 2030, most of these products will
be at some level available in the market.
One way to think about it is a bit like pharmaceuticals.
There'll be a first stage,
and then there'll be second stage releases, so that the things get better as
we keep investing in the technology.
So look, Emma, I think you're going to see quite...
You're going to see an all of a sudden, you're going to see a large amount of
products available, and farmers with quite a bit of choice.
The last update that Agzero put out, which is around accelerating the
greenhouse gas emissions, has a good table that goes through all of these.
And so there's two available at the moment.
One's genetics and sheep, and one is around manure management.
That's EcoPon.
The inhibitor... Sorry, that's EcoPon.
The inhibitor, which aiming for this year.
There's three the following year.
One, two, four, six, seven in 2028.
There's a range of things across that, from inhibitors to probiotics,
vaccines, pasture management, genetics, and then
EcoPon. So I'll provide this too. It's available. You should have a look.
There's a lot of information in there.
It's on the website.
Yeah. There's a lot of information there, and goes in through it in some detail.
Again, I want to come back to the point I was making earlier.
If a bolus is available later this year, that's a decision for farmers with their
processors as to whether they want to use it or not.
Yeah.
So we're taking a very different approach.
We are finding the tools, call it a toolbox-
Mm-hmm
... that farmers can select what they want to use.
Some of them will do what Steve's saying, and they'll achieve 30%, and others will
choose these and do it in other ways.
My view would be that each farmer will make a decision for themselves,
and some will want to take a bit of time to see what's happening.
Others will want to be early adopters.
The reason that we put money into helping with the early adoption
is actually so that farmers can see them there and can start to use
them. But the decision as to what they want to do and apply to their
farm will be one for the farmer themselves with their processor.
Okay. Well, we've got one from Maureen, and then we'll go Steve, and then Joe.
Just a quick sup on that, Minister.
So for these early adopters, are they seeing any market
advantage?
Well, so if you talk to our meat and dairy companies, they say that
their customers are asking them to do this.
Customers, not consumers. And
I take that at face value. I have no reason to
not accept what they're saying. And the reason we have moved
in the direction that we have is if they are correct and New
Zealand farmers don't do anything, then these companies won't have a product
to sell. And so ultimately, that's the reason why many of these
companies have joined Agzero and are putting up 50% of the money.
And secondly, they are starting to incentivize change on
farm themselves through payout, through paying a little bit extra for
the dairy solid or for per kilo of
the meat.
And
there is examples, I suppose, in some parts of the world where these
dairy companies or meat companies will talk about this, but
in the end you should view it as the cost of doing business,
except it shouldn't be a cost for the farmer.
I'll be very, very clear. If customers overseas are demanding this, those
customers should pay, not the New Zealand farmer.
Mm-hmm.
Steve, was yours a sup or a new question?
That's a new question.
Okay, so Joe.
Sorry. So just a sup on that. Thank you.
And you might have already kind of answered this with your early
adopter fund initiative. But
obviously, all of the science and all of these things, they cost a lot of money,
right? And we know that our farmers aren't necessarily
rolling in cash like some people might think that they are.
And you may not be able to answer this question, but how do we
make sure that those that wish to uptake some of these things, it's going to be
affordable?
Yeah. So Agzero does that. So if you think about it, without Agzero,
so it's really straightforward. If you go back to the days of He Waka Reka
Nua,
there was a debate that turned into an argument between sheep and beef
versus dairy.
Oh.
And some people said, "Well, dairy earns lots of money.
They're really, really rich. They can afford to pay." Actually, that somebody
may or may not be able to afford to pay is not a reason for charging them more than
you should. So the government's investment in Agzero, 50%
along with the private sector, is to make sure that the
solutions are available and they are affordable for New Zealand farmers.
We are investing in companies and ideas.
It is almost like venture capital, but it's a lot more focused because we
are driving outcomes. In my very first meeting with the
Agzero board, I said to them, "You're doing great work.
Hurry up and get them here for the farmers, please. Go harder and faster.
Be focused. Don't be like a government.
Be like the private sector." And so they are finding bright ideas, and they're
investing in them, and they'll decide whether they should continue, just as with
the private venture capital
organizations will. And those solutions now we are starting to see.
But mark my words, without us, they would be available probably somewhere around
the world. Would they come to New Zealand? I'm not sure.
If they did, would they be affordable? I would think probably not.
So this is our way of making sure that the New Zealand agricultural community has
them available to them, and that they will be affordable.
Ultimately, how they're paid for in the end will be a conversation between the
processor and the farmer.
Mm-hmm.
But if you go back to when NAIT and tracking was first done, there was a lot of
concern about it at the time and the cost and so on.
The cost have been brought down. It's just a part of doing business.
Without NAIT now, we wouldn't be able to sell around the world because we wouldn't
be able to
verify the safety and security of our food.
Ultimately, have great optimism that
farmers will use these when they are available to them, but they'll have to work
through that with their processor
Dana, quickly, and then we'll hopefully have time for one for Steve.
Thank you.
Minister, I just wanted to ask about the
rural communities and adverse events, and I know that you
have the Fund Agricultural Recovery Assistance Fund,
but I'm just interested to understand how that's targeted and what that
will look to do. We have more of these events.
Yeah.
My region gets hammered every time it rains.
And
I know that we've put in a lot of money, but just interested in how you see that
playing out for the future.
Yeah. Well, this is where we are preemptively going out to work with communities
and others to help them get ready to know what they do.
Many farmers and growers are very good at this, but we could probably never do
enough. And so it was a very easy decision to reallocate some money through the
budget to be able to do that, through backing farm leaders and
organizations and others there to go out.
Sometimes it's just about providing information, sometimes it'll be meetings or
seminars, sometimes it may well end up being farm by farm to
make sure that people know, in the case of weather incoming, what they should do
with their animals and how soon they should prepare and where to get help and those
sorts of things. I've got to say, the men and women of rural New Zealand are
extremely resilient, but the last few years have been a lot thrown at
them, and they continue to pick themselves up and care for their animals
and stand their kiwifruit vines up and everything else, and so on.
But we just see we have a real role to play in that.
It is a modest amount of money compared to some that we spend
elsewhere, but I think it will be money very well spent.
Where there is an event, we're very quick.
We've sort of moved from a situation where it's a little bit like a drought or
after a weather event. It used to be that we would wait until
it was really obvious there was a drought.
And I said to MPI that or when a weather event had come, we should give
certainty earlier. If we know that it's going to be a drought, why don't we
announce the funding support available earlier, rather than waiting until it is
really obvious, so people can plan, and they know that the support is there.
In the end, with adverse weather events, often we mobilize faster, get the money
ready, so it can be landing on the ground.
And whilst we're out of time, I'm very happy for Steve to have the last question.
That's very kind.
Thank you, Minister.
Thank you, Minister, and thank you, Madam Chair.
We've only got time for the question.
So be quick.
We've only got time for the question, not the answer.
Yeah.
We have no framework right now for there being an obligation on
those emitting biogenic methane and nitrous oxide in terms
of a legislative framework, because those gases aren't in the emissions trading
scheme.
Therefore, it was seen as a citizen's right to take
the biggest polluter to court
for the impact that those polluters were having on those citizens, and
this is a court case that began under the previous government, so it's not peculiar
to yours. However, are you comfortable with having shut
down that citizen right to the court,
citizen recourse through the courts, around the Fonterra Z Energy
case?
Steve.
When really that was a process that should have been allowed to run its
course, surely.
I don't accept the premise of what you've said as fact to start with.
Okay.
There's a reason that it happened.
And so ultimately, there is an obligation in statute in New
Zealand for New Zealand to be net zero by 2050, and in the case of
agriculture is concerned, for us to reduce methane emissions between 14 and
24% by 2050. It is a government
obligation, and it's for government to work out how this should be done.
But the idea that you have to have something, it's a very large stick to
hold over people to make them do the right thing, I don't accept and I don't agree.
The whole debate and the conversation so far has been about farmers actually
making changes where they need to and being up to that, from
environmental water quality to methane emissions.
In as far as decisions that Cabinet has made,
it was all of Cabinet's made, and as far as the court case is concerned, we
have realigned expectation around what the government's original intention was,
not the direction that the litigators were heading.
But I'm not responsible for agriculture for that.
Thank you.
Right. So if everyone's happy, we'll move on to forestry.
The delegation of forestry. If you want to make some opening remarks, that's great,
and then open it up for our questions.
Yes, I will. Thank you very much. Again, forestry is a very important
part of the sector. The approach that we've taken over the last three
years to the primary industries is the same.
From agriculture, where we've been looking to simpli-
Sorry, minister. Just wait for a second. We'll just wait till everyone's done.
It's quite noisy.
It's normally the speaker that gets put off, not the listeners.
Okay.
Very good. I'll start again. So look, the forestry
sector is very important to the New Zealand economy.
It's worth about almost 40,000 jobs through provincial
and rural New Zealand. They're parts of the country where forestry has been
the backbone, the earner for generations of
families. We and I have taken the same approach to forestry as I have to other
parts of the primary sector, to look to simplify and make rules better and
easier for
foresters to meet obligations, but at the same time, to very
much focus upon risk. We have had it for a period of time as a result of weather
events and other things, councils around New Zealand are putting in place
conditions on foresters that in the end have been a burden.
They haven't been based upon good evidence,
and in the end have added cost and complexity where
perhaps it hasn't achieved an outcome.
So you will have seen that we've made a number of changes in these
areas,
from
additional funding to
working with
the councils, others, the replacement of changes, the National Environment
Standard for commercial forestry
and so on. Now, this is to very much make it easier for our
councils to set clear, smart,
intelligent rules and easier for foresters to have the
certainty they need that when they plant trees today, there will be
conditions where they are able to harvest those 20 years
later when they are
... uh, when they're, when they're mature, and that at the same time, the
rules will continue to be fit for purpose around a social license.
Now, last week at the Fieldays, I was able to announce, uh, a new policy for the
forestry sector that looks towards, uh, what they're doing internationally and
export, and it's called New Zealand Pine, and it is a standard the
government has set. If you think about it, uh, when we sell
our goods from the primary sector around the world, we
have, uh, New Zealand beef, and we have New Zealand dairy, we have New Zealand
kiwifruit. Uh, but we just had pine or radiata pine.
And so when I was in India, um, uh, la- end of last
year for a negotiation, I took a forestry and wood processing
trade mission with me. In a conversation, I asked them why,
uh, they, uh, you know, had never thought to, uh, talk
about, uh, the wood that we grow here a- as a brand.
So we work very closely with them, and so we have now come together, uh, the sector
and the government to create a standard called New Zealand Pine.
And what that means is that actually when you go overseas to India, where you'll
have a 0% tariff rate, or into China or into the European Union or everywhere else
we sell wood, whether it is a wood product that has had value added to it,
it is sawn lumber and timber or as a log, it would be known as New Zealand Pine.
And then the sector itself can develop around that.
Um, um, you- you know, the story they want to tell about
sustainable use of wood and the higher standards and, and these sorts of things.
And so I think that's an advantage to us.
Actually, what it does is it brings the sector together, uh, because for far too
long, they have been viewed as people that grow trees and sell them cheaply
overseas. We are seeing greater value being invested in wood processing in New
Zealand. Forestry plays a very, very important, uh, role.
And actually, I think they will end up getting better returns, uh, for what they
do, uh, overseas. There's a lot more here, and I've got officials with me, but why
don't I stop because I think we've only got 45 minutes.
Thank you, Minister. Right, we have a question from Kris Faafoi.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Tena koutou minister. Kia ora koutou katoa.
Um,
it's good to see some positive movement in forestry, Minister, but just going back
to your preparation, continuing the cleanup from, um, Cyclone
Gabriel, um, how's that tracking?
How's it focused, and how's it being managed in terms of who's working on it?
Yeah, very good. Well, well, um, it was a very big challenge.
Uh, if you think about the council there, it is very challenging and difficult for
them. Probably they've been asked to do something that even for government would
be very, very difficult because it's large and complex and there are ongoing and
additional weather events. You know, when I was before you, uh,
last, uh, year, we talked a little bit about some of the changes that I
had made in, uh, Tirapaki around the, the funding.
I'll ask, uh, officials to speak in a moment to the exact amounts and
so on. But in the budget, uh, budget 2024 allowed
$27 million, um, um,
of additional funding. It's a total of $110 million for the
cleanup. Been 605,000 metric,
uh, uh, metric cube of, uh, forests, of, of
woody biomass removed, uh, so far, uh, in
cooperation, uh, with the council.
We set up the Tirapaki Forest Action Group, uh, and I gave them the mandate of
working with council and others. You know, it's a, it's a cross-sector group from
forestry, farming, iwi council, to focus on
cleaning up more wood for what, uh, for the money that we had,
uh, and actually for them to then start also looking at wood that probably is still
in the hills and was a liability to come down in the future, and
they've made signi- significant gains and have done a very, very good job.
We now have to start turning our mind to, um, land use change,
uh, and with the council, the council's been working at this for some period of
time. Uh, I, I got to say that, um, it is again, a very, very
challenging issue, uh, for any council in the country, and
certainly that one. You'll remember the independent report that was put together,
put together for us, uh, and when there were, um, in the previous
government, uh, uh, administrators and observers put in with the council.
One of the things that report found and the, uh, administrators or
observers, uh, did report, uh, to us, was they were extremely
concerned that Gisborne Council may not have the capacity, uh, or,
or, uh, capability to achieve all that is needed in that
area. I, I don't think that is an unfair observation.
We've been trying to work pretty closely with them on how we can ensure that they
get the very, very best outcomes for that.
And so progress is good and moving in the right direction, but there's always gonna
be more to do.
I see you.
Oh, Puwera. Sorry. Thank you.
Uh, kia ora mai. I'm on marginal reception, um, on my way to
Hokianga, but hopefully the minister can hear me.
Mm-hmm.
Yes.
Kia ora. Um, so I'm-- I'll keep it limited because of my reception,
but I did wanna ask around, um, funding,
supporting capability and capacity building,
um, and also engagement with community and industry groups.
There is, um, what I can see, limited funds in that space to
support. Um, so what does that tangibly look like on the ground?
Can we get some narrative around what are the focuses of that dollar?
And then a secondary question is around supporting Māori
foresters. Similar to what we have in agriculture,
um, uh, are there dedicated dollars, um, to support
Māori foresters to come together, work as collectives to build
capacity and capability?
Yeah. Thanks so much. The answer to both of those is yes and yes.
Uh, there is funding available and work that's been done on the ground, uh, very
broadly and around Māori forestry.
It's a very important, uh, part of, of what we do.
Uh, I, I mentioned earlier that, um, I, I'd given Mike Buttrick as Associate
Minister, specific responsibility for agri- Māori agribusiness.
And within that, although I'm Forestry Minister, um, he has the ability
to work away in forestry. There's a lot of land that is not as well utilized
as it need to be, a lot of land that is, um, that, that is
isolated or has no access to it. And I have asked him to engage
very broadly with iwi, uh, uh, um, a- and landowners to
where-- start looking at, not, uh, for everywhere at the same
time, but even on a piece of land by bit of land, case by case basis,
what needs to be done to free that up to drive better outcomes.
You will know that when we, uh, put in place the, uh, bans and restrictions on
full farm-to-forest conversions, uh, the government looked at exempt, uh,
Māori-owned land from that. And so I think you will continue to see
afforestation on Māori land where the landowners themselves want that to
happen. But some of the specific details of, uh, projects and so on, amounts that
we're spending, particularly on, uh, Māori forestry, uh, maybe Sam
can speak to
Yeah. Kia ora, Huhana. Huhana, you can hear me okay?
Yeah, I'll try to give a practical example to both your questions, Huhana.
The first question around what support is on the ground, I guess I'd categorize
that in two or three places. A focus of Te Uru Rākau at the
moment is continuing to build our insight and data capability, so we know
that insight and data are a fundamental
product which support informed decision-making.
And so that ranges from national exotic forest description, wood availability
forecast, market intelligence, and the like.
So that would be one part. A second part would be the advisory and
support services that we have on the ground.
So, similar to on-the-farm support, we do have
forestry support services on the ground.
We focus that service around seven working circles.
What that means in practice, we have about 22
staff based from anywhere from Whangarei right down to Dunedin.
And so those people, those professionals
are available to liaise with landowners, forest
owners, or council, or anyone to help
connect information to inform on the range of products and
services that MPI and Te Uru Rākau has available.
The second part of your question, in terms of targeted support for
Maori, I'll answer in two parts. One, we,
Te Uru Rākau, work very closely with Glen Webber and his Maori agribusiness team.
And in practice, what that looks like, a recent example in Tairawhiti,
where we, alongside with Glen's team, went out to Tairawhiti to
provide support to Tairawhiti Whenua, which is a group of
50 or so land trusts. And specifically that was around looking
at what is the opportunity for participation in the ETS with regenerating
scrub and native on the East Coast.
And so that partnership, that pairing of capability within MPI is a
real opportunity and a real strength that we continue to leverage.
Going back to within Te Uru Rākau, we have a small team,
which
helps across Te Uru Rākau look at strategic engagement with
Maori and build our internal capability as well.
So that's hopefully a couple of practical examples.
If I can stop on that, Madam Chair.
Yes.
I'm wanting to unpack and understand what is the
nature of the relationship between Te Uru Rākau
and Ngā Puao Tane as a
body that does come together across the motu to try
and add value, but also to support their capacity to go
back and leverage and consult
on important things for the forestry sector.
So that's one further question. And then for training and capability,
mindful that our training within the vocational
education sector is kind of limited,
is there any way whereby we are doing some work
collectively from Te Uru Rākau across with
vocational education to look at the necessary skills that we need for
today, but also for tomorrow, and broadening what's available
to potential learners and then getting them into jobs?
Yeah.
I'll answer the first one there, Huhana, and then I'll pass back to the minister.
So the first one in terms of the history and connection with Ngā Puao Tane,
as you know, dating back to I think 2021,
Te Uru Rākau supported the setup phase of Ngā Puao Tane as a
representative group for Maori.
A secondary project was the release of that strategy, which
was formally released
towards the middle of last year.
There's ongoing conversation, Huhana, around opportunities of
alignment between Ngā Puao Tane's strategy and Te Uru Rākau's strategy, and
we're not going to agree in all spaces, but of course there will be
overlap and opportunity on a project basis to continue working together.
On the training part, you're right, it is very important.
In fact, a lot of forestry training across the board was done at
the Waiariki Polytechnic in
Rotorua that then became Toi Ohomai some time ago.
Very sadly, that was indicated a year or so ago that it
would stop. It is a shame because it was a feeder into
Canterbury where degrees can take place for forest management
and other sorts of things. The very good news and pleasing news is after I had an
opportunity as Minister of Forestry, but also as the
Member of Parliament for Rotorua, to talk to the Tertiary Minister, and with
changes have been made to the structure, including a new board at Toi
Ohomai and a new CEO, they are looking to reinvigorate
training when it comes to
the forestry and wood processing sector from Toi Ohomai, and I assume the
campus in Rotorua, although that would be a decision for them.
I think there more broadly, there are very good, important
jobs throughout the regions available to all New Zealanders, including young New
Zealanders when it comes to
forestry.
There are many
communities that
their families have always got wealth from our forests.
And so I think once Toi Ohomai is able to get themselves in a position
to reestablish the training that's needed, there'll be an opportunity
with the Tertiary Minister then look at
what more should be done. What I would do, though, is caution.
The government has a role, a very important role to play, probably the most central
one, but it has to be done with the sector and others involved, including
iwi, as to what's best and what's needed.
There are always examples of when people are churned out of our institutions and
they go to the workforce And their skills are more academic than they are in
practice. And from health and safety to
viticulture, to... Not viticulture.
To, what's the
term for forests?
Silviculture.
Silviculture. I'm wine minister also.
From silviculture and so on, actually, we need good hands-on
practices. But I've got a very, very clear message to anybody who's sitting at
home wondering what they should do career-wise.
Agriculture and the primary sector's fantastic, and forestry has
great opportunities for the future.
Thank you, Minister. Now we've now got Paulo.
Minister, we sit in this select committee room
with the most wood, and very skillfully processed.
My question is,
could you expound on the government's initiatives
to support the forest industry?
Yeah.
And as a sub to that,
the higher value wood processing.
Yeah. Well, look, that's a very good question.
Ultimately, the government doesn't own the trees.
We have some of our own, and so I've got to be very careful.
I don't want to be in a position where I tell people to do with what they, to tell
them what to do with the wood that they
produce. We need to support them, but we need to level the playing field.
I am of a view that there is a reason that logs go overseas and not enough value
added in New Zealand, and we've been working consistently to try and address that,
including changes that would say you get a consent for a
wood processing plant more easily, with more certainty, which brings the
cost down. We have funds available that help us
in some of these areas,
which I'm just going to find here so I get it exactly
right.
Wood processing teams.
Wood processing funds.
Wood processing growth fund.
Tell us, Sam.
So the Wood Processing Growth Fund, Paulo, is an opportunity to reduce the
cost and risk of investment and feasibility
activity.
Good.
And equally, improves access to capital for those looking to do large
scale. So ultimately, what it's trying to do is
to support the opportunity to produce more valued good,
value-add products here onshore.
So we are a fiber-rich nation. The opportunity for growth
within the forestry and wood product sector is less about growing more.
It's about doing more and supporting more markets with value-add product.
Mm. Yes. And then at the same time, better market access around the
world too. You have this problem when it comes to trade that often your log can go
at a very low tariff rate, and as you add value to
the wood itself, tariff escalation, tariff rate goes up.
It's prohibitive. So we always look to sort of level the playing field so that when
value is added here in New Zealand, it can get access to markets
overseas. We've had a body of work underway with Australia
around structural timber. I might have spoken about that in the
committee before. It's very hard for New Zealand structural timber to be sold into
Australia, even though they have a wood deficit they must import from the
world, and it's because their standards are different than ours.
And their view is our wood is not strong enough to be structural.
Either they're right or we're right.
We can't both be right, and our houses are not falling down, so I suspect it's us.
But their government and agriculture minister, there's a joint study undertaken by
a university to start looking at those.
And if we could get that
certification or recognition on the strength of New Zealand wood, that would be a
significant opportunity for New Zealand.
And the final bit here is part of that land use
flexibility
project or concept that we were talking about earlier.
In forestry, we're putting joint funding into a feasibility on
modular building construction, which in itself
multiplies the value of the log by almost seven times.
And so-
Wow
... there will be many things we do around technology and so on to help with this.
But adding more value in New Zealand is something that's important.
There's another bit though that is less traditional, where I think you will see
greater value, and that is the use of the fiber in our
forests for energy.
Yeah.
And there are many, many ideas that are very, very good ideas.
There's talk in parts of New Zealand where people may decide to plant,
to have trees promulgated that grow
faster, perhaps could sequest more carbon more
quickly, and they might cut them down after six or seven years and then use
only for energy, as opposed to waiting for 20 years and
putting them through a sawmill and the residual is for energy.
These are all good ideas. We've got funding available through our government to
support and help with this, although again, I would caution us, there are many,
many people out there with great ideas-
Yeah
... and solutions, that they can't attract any private
sector capital to. It's actually a partnership we want to do it rather than
government doing it alone. But I think you'll see over the next sort of four or
five years, for a range of reasons, the fiber
that's in the tree valued more greatly than it is at the moment just as a log,
and there will be a significant number of additional uses for it, including I
think energy could be a very important part of how we meet our
climate obligations and grow greater energy for sufficiency.
That was the question.
From-
Thanks, sir
... Rosha and then Dana.
Minister, you've talked about adding more value and referred to asset value
creation. Can you tell us what that means, what it looks like
specifically?
Asset value creation? Well, it'd be a number of things, including more forests that
are more mature and the value goes up.
But I come back to Maori land as an example.
There are parts of the country where
trees could well be grown and would add value to the asset of that land
straight away. But it's just about enabling some of
those choices. With a lot of Maori land, there
are obstacles that we need to work through that in other parts
of the economy, a bit to land there aren't.
But that would be a very important part of it, I think.
Dana.
But he didn't get to that.
Oh, sorry.
Sort of a-
There was a reason why I spoke to this
... serendipitous something.
Okay.
Yeah.
Well, okay, and then-
Does Sap want anything to add to that? No, I think we're good.
Well, has MPI got anything to-
I'm not rich.
So on-
What's your actual question?
What do you mean by asset value creation specifically?
Where have we said it?
Under the Crown Revenues,
stuff shifting from active harvesting to asset value
creation.
Oh, okay.
Maturing forests.
Yeah.
Sorry, forests.
The Crown still owns about 30,000 hectares of
commercial forestry. So Crown Forestry is a business unit which sits under Te Uru
Rākau. We're moving from a phase, commissioner.
Historically, it's been a harvest-focused work program.
We're now going back to a growing part
of the life cycle. So it's all about value development through subculture.
So it's protecting and tending the forest to improve the value of the asset.
So it's more about spending money than selling logs right now.
Yeah.
Okay.
So in some cases, newer forests, you may prune more
regularly, so you have stronger, straighter wood that can be used differently.
But it's the
promotion or attendance to the forest and the age of the forest
as well, which would add additional value for the Crown.
Okay.
Fancy way of saying growing new trees.
Yeah.
Well, you grow them better though, too.
And supporting the financial statements, which there's less revenue and more
expenditure at the moment.
My next one when you say-
If you just think on that, if you harvest your forest at 15 or 20 years, it
has a value. If you leave it for another 10, the value of the forest
increases.
Yeah.
And those are decisions that we make from a forestry point of view.
My sub was about wood processing and about the opportunity in
India for processed products, i.e., pulp or-
Yeah
... construction. And I know-
Huge
... that they were interested, but I wonder if you have any insight into that,
because it's a massive building site at the moment in India.
Yeah, look, a huge, huge opportunity into India.
We've got 95% of all wood products will go into India, will be at a
zero tariff rate from day one, and that's a significant
opportunity. In fact, this week, I think, the very first shipment
of wood and logs from the South Island is in a ship and on its
way to India.
Yeah, cool.
And I think it was a deal when I took that forestry mission up there last year.
I think it was a deal that was done when they were there, and it just demonstrates
there's a lot of interest in what we produce.
But from a value-added point of view as well, it's not just logs, although logs
will be part of that.
I don't have all of the figures in front of me,
but we used to be a very important part of wood sales
into India. There are a number of reasons why that
changed. Then Australia got a free trade agreement, and their
increase in exports of wood products went up hundreds of
percent from memory. I'll get the exact figures and give them to you because
there's lots of different figures bounced around and ours shrank during that period
of time. We've got an opportunity to build that back, but I think there will be
chances around value-added rather than only logs going up there, although, again,
logs will be an important part of that trade. India's growing very, very quickly.
Construction to manufacturing. They're opening more universities
every year than anyone else in the world, more airports every year than anyone else
in the world, building more roads and everything else.
And so for New Zealand businesses and companies that now have a right to be
there and be part of that under the FTA and with a zero tariff rate for almost
all of the wood products we produce, then there will be significant opportunity
for the New Zealand
forestry sector. And this just gives them more options.
As markets around the world
diminish or tariffs come up or economies slow, they have
options as to where they want to put their product.
And I think, in essence,
India will become a very important part of the forestry sector.
Right.
Do you have a sub? Yes.
Yes, I do.
On that note, minister, talking about wood processing, I think everyone agrees that
we want to extract more value from the forest that we're growing.
You've talked about structural, you've talked about energy.
Can you give examples of other value options you're
looking into, if at all, like perhaps the extraction of chemicals?
I am.
What else is being-
Yeah
... pursued?
So some time ago, Scion did some work around that of what else you
could take from
a New Zealand pine tree. Not a radiata pine tree, but a New
Zealand pine tree, because that's what we're calling it from now on.
Ultimately, there are many things there.
There is talk around
doing much more innovative science in some of these areas.
So if you talk to the
average forester
or others, then generally the view is that
you grow a tree, you cut it down, it's turned into a table, a house, or the
log is sent overseas or something.
But we know that there are many parts of that tree, in addition to the fiber, will
have value. And so, there are many projects of the
way. By the way, earlier in the last hearing, we were talking about the
Primary Sector Growth Fund. We've ensured that the forestry sector, including
processors and others, have the same access to that fund as anybody
else does across the primary sector.
It's not just agricultural or horticultural, and
good projects will be assessed and funding would be available.
But I think the answer is there's a very wide range of things that it can be used
for, from the equivalent of turpentine, where there's a company in New Zealand
that's looking to develop that in and around Kawerau, to all sorts
of other, many other things.
Absolutely. Yes, sure.
Minister, you've rightfully acknowledged that there are many people out there with
good ideas.
Have you considered subsidizing these ideas rather than pursuing
partnerships at the risk of projects not being realized
because people can't raise the funding needed?
Well,
so you've got to be very, very careful because the government only has so much
resource, and it's not ours. We take it from the taxpayer, and so largely,
whenever we put money into something, generally the government has to be there to
socialize risk
And so ultimately,
if you are socialising risk, you have to be very, very careful on behalf of the
taxpayer, because actually that means the greater the risk offered, the
greater the subsidy. The less the private sector wants to invest, the
greater the likelihood that the taxpayer doesn't get a return or loses their money.
So largely, it is in cooperation, but there are examples where
there is... I don't think subsidy is the right word, because subsidy suggests you'd
have to do it forever. And in most of our trade agreements, WHO, we don't subsidize
things. Others, like the European Union do, and we fight against them all the time.
It's like grants.
Support.
That's where I was heading.
Grant.
Exactly right, yeah, grants and so on. So, there are support available.
As an example, through the
Kanoa, there are grants available that have gone into projects in the
forestry industry sector or other types of projects and so on.
So it's not just within the budget that we have, there are other parts of
government to support that.
Are you aware of any grants that are going to pursue some of the
new technologies and new opportunities we're talking about?
Yeah. We'll give you example of one, but why don't we come up with a list and
send it back in rather than going through.
Oh, sorry. I was just about to say,
the minister referred to the package of land use flexibility projects.
Within that-
Yeah
... there's a project called VOMO.
So that's an $8 million project where the government's putting in 3.8 million.
So you highlighted two, what are the other examples?
One was engineered wood products and the other is, as you highlighted, the
bioproducts industry. So the VOMO project is an
approach which looks at prefabrication of modular mass timber
units. So that's manufacturing offsite,
using mass timber in a standardized module, which can be rolled
out across a number of verticals like schools, student
accommodation, hospitals, hotels, anything where there's
a repetitive modular kind of thing.
Mm-hmm.
And so this is a pretty exciting project which is currently
applied
in Europe. And the
provider believes there's opportunity to roll that out in a New Zealand context.
So it's a very innovative approach to construction and a low
carbon method of construction.
And around bioenergy, there's a number of projects that are, I mean, at various
stages, have been considered, I understand. But again, that's with the Crown.
Thank you. Jo, you have a question?
Yes, I do. Thank you. I know that there's an over 57
million increase in the capital investment in the Crown's
forestry assets appropriation.
Is that for the purchase of new forests and/or planting of new
forests?
It's MYA. It's a little bit MYA.
Yeah. It's just-
It needs to be rolled over.
Or is it for something totally-
It can be rolled over. Yeah.
It's-
So it's-
You go ahead.
So that reflects
the capital investment in the Crown's forest, the joint venture forest.
It's the end of a five-year MYA, so that money is not planned to be
spent this year.
The MYA will expire at the end of 2027, and that'll be rolled over into another
five-year MYA. So, it's just the timing.
It's a technical accounting.
Another one of those.
Yeah, it's quite.
Okay.
Thank you. That is all. Thank you.
Good.
Madam Chair.
Oh, just in the nick of time.
I've had my hand up for a little while.
Sitting here.
I only just saw the wood for the trees.
I know.
I wanted to stop quickly on what Kushla was raising around
investment and research and development, knowing that there's, what, some $400
million being cut across research,
across government. Can the
officials tell us how much
those research dollar cuts will impact on
forestry specifically?
Well, look, for the funding that we have in our budget, it still remains there.
We move it around from time to time, but I pay particular attention to
forestry, and I often argue with the Agriculture Minister to make sure that
forestry has its fair share.
If you think about Scion as an example, which has dedicated most of the research
are all for forestry, it remains there on the campus.
It's come together sort of as part of the primary sector research, but we've
sought and received assurances that forestry will continue to
be a performer and as far as scientific research is concerned.
The site of Scion continues. They have some ideas about what more they'd like to
do with it. They're working through that sort of thing, by way of business case at
the moment, and some of them are quite, quite exciting, although they're early
days.
We will always grow very straight
trees in New Zealand. New Zealand pine grows faster here than anywhere
else in the world. But as with other parts of the primary
sector, we need to find other uses and greater
value from what's inside the tree than just the
log itself. And the only way to do that is through science.
And so, we'll keep ensuring that the funding is available.
In many cases where things come to us that are
outside of, I'm not responsible for the part that
you're talking about, but where we have funding available and projects through the
Primary Sector Growth Fund, forestry gets its fair share as well.
I think in the next few years, you'll hear much more from the private
sector in cooperation with the government about
new uses, not of wood, but of
the tree itself. And some of those have the ability to create significant
value, not only for foresters and landowners, but more broadly for the
New Zealand economy.
Kushla. Thank you.
Minister, you have announced a $27.8
million
fund for erosion control between July 27
and June 31. When can we hear what projects
will be funded?
Yeah. Well, so firstly, it's very important because there are parts of the country
where we have a lot of erosion. Some of this is forestry, but other parts, of
course, is around farms. We sort of take a similar approach to all of
that. And
the work and detail that's going on as to where it might best be
spent is probably less a forestry one, but I don't know if there's someone else
here who can speak to it.
Road control, yeah.
The evaluation of that is actually starting today.
So, it's the second four-year tranche of funding.
We recognize that council's landowners need
certainty.
And so whilst we've still got a year of the first
four-year tranche, we're trying to start early on that second four-year tranche to
ensure there's continuity. So, decisions will
be presented for the minister towards the end,
in the next three to six months.
Can you give an update on any current active erosion projects?
Can I give an update on any active current erosion projects?
Maybe a good one would be right now, GDC,
$800,000 under the first four-year
program. And so that $800,000 goes
towards
capacity within council for land management, capability and capacity.
It goes towards supporting erosion plans on farm, and it also goes
towards supporting poplar pole planting.
So, as you know,
it's oversubscribed. There's going to be-
Mm
... more ask than what's available-
... but it's a very meaningful fund.
Yeah, because once that money's spent on the
capacity and the plan, is there going to be money left for the
execution?
Well, every council comes with a different set of proposals around what they need
in their region. So we don't prescribe that.
Horizons have a different approach where they have their own
poplar nurseries, and the way that they do it is they use a third of the funding
from the Crown, a third of their own funding,
and the landowner pays a third to actually buy the poplar poles.
So there's different approaches.
It's not a
standardized approach.
Is there a commitment to- Through you, Chair. Question. Yeah Sorry.
Sorry, Madam Chair. That's okay. Is there a commitment to continue
or prioritize funding for people who have already received
funding to develop capacity and plans?
Well, we'll look on that. It's on a case-by-case basis.
There's no decision not to, but we also want to broaden out
those that may need access to funding and so on.
So those are things that'll be brought to me to consider.
In some cases, you may well find those who've got funding need less of it
or want more of it or want to change what they're doing.
And so it's four years it rolls over, but on a case-by-case
basis, it's made. There's no decision to say it could be taken
away from anybody. Evaluations and schemes need to be able to take place and then
prioritization about what more they mainly may do around erosion.
Thank you.
Okay. Okay. Thanks. Thanks, Madam Chair.
It would be remiss of me not to ask a question about the East Coast.
Minister,
how do you intend to reduce risks from forests planted throughout the East Coast
for erosion control,
that are no longer viable for harvesting?
Well,
you will have seen that the council has done a lot of work in that area.
There was a report done under the previous government, which we inherited,
that needs to be worked through, firstly.
Secondly, the changes to the NES for commercial
forestry move very much to a risk-based approach.
There'll be areas where there are greater and more stringent rules required than
some other parts where actually there is less required based upon
risk. So that's to set up the framework for country.
In the Tairāwhiti region, there continue to be significant
challenges. And so the way to do this is for the council,
with the Crown, to work with landowners and foresters to find the
very best way to achieve the outcomes that we need.
I've got to say that, again, as I said earlier, I think the council has a very
challenging job because it was a significant weather event.
And there have been reports that have been done previously, previous government
that I've inherited, that draw attention to and ask questions
about the capacity and capability.
This is not a reflection necessarily on individuals in the council, it is more to
do with the significance of the scale of the event and the work that needs to be
done to rectify the land use change is a very important part of that.
I have to say that, that I am disappointed that the Gisborne Council
seem to have decided that the only real tool that they have or want to use is
that of enforcement, because there are examples of people who are
exemplary in their approach to forestry.
They are doing things they don't need to outside of their consent.
They are spending their own money and,
or inviting council out to come and talk to them about what needs to be done, and
there seems to be a fairly heavy-handed approach to enforcement.
Although, albeit, I accept enforcement is an important tool.
I think the best way to get the best outcome for Tairāwhiti is for the council to
work closely with all landowners and interested parties on an
almost a case-by-case basis on what the solutions will be there.
There are examples where people have another 10 years before they have to log, and
they've been told that actually they need to get rid of their forest
today. And ultimately, the way they've been asked to get rid of their forest, they
would view as challenging for the environment.
So I've asked officials to engage deeply with the council, provide them the support
they need. Coming back to the point of the report that was generated for the
previous government, drawing attention to the challenges
around capacity and capability of the council.
And I think it's in everybody's interest to find ways forward on that.
Mm.
Speaking of the official support,
if people think, for example, the only way out for them
to survive is carbon,
is there any support
Being provided from government to ensure we don't create future
hazards for when trees come to the end of lifecycle.
How do you mean by the only way out is carbon?
Well, if people are grappling up the coast at the moment and trying to think what
they can do, like you've said, some of them-
I know
... feel like they're going to
have to remove their forests.
For some to stay viable, they're looking at all the options.
I see.
If they decide their only option is carbon-
... what support can they expect-
Yeah
... in the future?
So if you step back from support, the only reason
in the future they wouldn't have the ability to keep forest or
to have challenges on
their land is if the rules changed.
So if you think about much of the wood that's come down to weather events,
some of that is legacy wood. It is from logging many years
ago based on the rules of the time.
Okay.
So we have to get the rules right. That's the reason, both with the RMA
replacement, but the changes to the
National Environment Standard for commercial forestry, we are looking at a
rules-based approach. One of the things we're saying is this is the standard for
the following reasons. Councils are able to go further than that
standard should they want, but it has to be based upon evidence.
So I think what you've seen in the past is decisions are made for a range of
reasons that probably aren't based on evidence always and,
as a result, we end up, in the future, dealing with the
consequences. So what we're trying to do across forestry, as well as agriculture
and horticulture, everything in the private sector, is to create
certainty and try and get a regulatory framework in place that is
easily understood, it's not heavy and bureaucratic, based upon risk, and achieves
what we need to. What we need in Tairāwhiti, every part of New
Zealand, is a forestry industry that is responsible, and they meet their
obligations, and that actually the rules support them.
But what we're seeing far too often, as a result of weather events, and I can
understand the reason why, is a move towards rules that actually
are prohibitive and restrictive, but in itself may not achieve what
a council would want. So the only thing I can say what support would be
available is we're going to keep working very hard with the councils, the
experts, and the forestry sector themselves, because they know as much about
growing trees as what happens on their land as anybody else does, how
we come up with the rules that are fit for purpose, and in the case of your
question, can stand the test of time.
That won't be done in one day or one week, and it'll
continue to take a lot of effort. But we actually, for
Tairāwhiti and many other parts of New Zealand, need to get the rules right,
because without forestry on land that can be forested, then
there would be a very big hole in the local economy.
And I have heard the mayor say that she wants investment in wood processing in the
area, which I agree with. But some of the things the council at the moment is
driving people away from Tairāwhiti, not towards it.
So I want to work with them to get the balance right.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Minister.
You're welcome.
Thank you.
Did you have another question?
One more.
Oh, you want to ask-